Guys this video is made possible by monday.com,
a team management platform creating more efficient and intuitive ways to manage
teams and entire operations.
Support the show and try monday.com through the link below
Peter, the great was perhaps the most important in Russian history.
He took a kingdom that was stuck in its old ways and transformed it into a
modern and powerful empire. He looked to the west for inspiration.
Peter ignored the I isolationist policies and traditions of his predecessors
becoming the first star to visit other European countries. There.
He gains knowledge into current military and scientific advancements ship
building T diplomatic affairs, even fashion trends,
and brought them home with him.
Peter's ambition to turn Russia into a great maritime power required expansion,
which in turn required war. In fact,
he spends most of his adult years involved in one conflict or another,
but in the end he achieved his goal, whether it was worth it or not,
we cannot say,
but it's certain had a major ever lasting impact on the history of Russia
and Europe as a whole.
He was born Pieta Alexia Avi on June the ninth,
1672 war may the 30th going by the old star calendar.
He was part of the influence house of Romanov,
which ruled Russia over 300 years until the February revolution of 1917.
When SAR Nicholas II was forced to abdicate subsequently being executed along
with his family by the BOLs of ex Peter was the son of Alex Macha, Lavi,
better known as Alexis. The first SAR of Russia,
he was Alexis's 14th child overall,
but the fur and only son that the SAR had with his second wife,
Natalia NAA.
This will come into play later when Peter will face challenges to his throne.
When he was born,
Peter was a healthy boy of normal size and was described as having his mother's
black, vaguely tar our eyes and a tough of or hair. In fact,
we can give you the precise measurements of the Royal infants to a Russian
tradition called taking the measure.
It involved painting an image of the boys' patron sane to surprisingly was Peter
the apostle on a board with the same dimensions as the baby,
which were in this case 19 and a quarter inches long and five and a quarter
inches wide.
Peter's good health was considered a blessing on a house that seemed with fee.
He Alex's first wife, Maria Miller love sky gave the SAR five sons,
but only two of them reached adulthoods and both were in poor health.
The eldest Fido Alexia had been left partially paralyzed by a mysterious
childhood illness. Well, the other son, Ivan Alexia,
Avi was described as being infer in the body and mind as ruler Peter,
the greats would become noted for his westernization of Russia. However,
this process was initiated by his mother whose own upbringing had a Western
influence and she would pass on her interests to her son,
right from the beginning of their marriage SAR,
Natalia shared with her new husband, her love of music and theater.
Prior to this,
an edict of Alexi turned the Sodom of Russia into that town from Footloose where
music and dancing had been banned, except that in Russia,
they could get you beaten with rods or even banished Alex and Natalia had a
choir and an orchestra playing music.
Soon after they became patrons of the theater,
the song asked devotion to his new wife only increased after she had given birth
to a healthy baby boy like Peter.
In 16, 76, Sox fell ill after staying out in the cold winter air.
And he died 10 days later,
this triggered the beginning of a power struck between the families of his two
wives,
the Miller Slosky and the kin Alex's oldest son Fior was
his successor. His father had officially recognized him as his app,
even so very few people thought it likely that he would actually become SAR
since nobody expected the feeble Fior to outlive his father. And he had,
it happens on June the 18th, 1676,
the sickly 15 year old was crowned Theodore III Newar of Russia. Allegedly.
He had to be carried during his coronation because his legs were so swollen that
he couldn't walk. At first, there was no out hostility between the two families,
Theodore,
especially never displayed any ill will towards his half brother or his
stepmother.
It's also worth mentioning that the Norish and still had a notable ally in
Artman.
Mattia the statesman who served as Natalia's foster father and close advisor to
Sarah, Alexis. He wanted Peter to take the throne,
even though he was just four years old at the time of his father's death,
he failed to convince the other nobleman though.
And for his attempted interference,
he was EXR from Moscow to a remote part of the kingdom.
The relationship between in the two families took a drastic turn,
six years later when feared or died without an app,
technically his other brother Ivan was next in line to the throne,
but his physical and mental disabilities proved to be a great concern to the
Russian Nobles. Okay. The boy in 1682,
they held a special assembly called a Douma and selected 10 year old Peter as
feared or so accessor with his mother Naya acting as his Regent.
One of her first actions was to bring Matt back to Moscow,
to serve as their advisor.
This arrangement did not sit well with the Miller Slosky family who still wanted
Ivan to rule a saw with someone else acting as his Regents.
They managed to get the Russian military core,
the STRs on their side and lead the Moscow uprising of 1682 in may
R erupted on the streets of Moscow with many Norkin allies,
branded as traders emit hearsay that SAR Theodor may have been poisoned.
The Remus grew even greater to a point where there was talk of an Eskin
conspiracy to kill all the Royals. On the Milosky side.
Of course the real conspiracy was against the Norkin.
And two of the main perpetrators were Sophia Alexia,
ner daughter of SA Alexis and sister Toor,
and a statesman named VLE Galyon on may the 15th, the SQUI storms,
the Kremlin looking to take down all of those who they perceived as traders.
They had been convinced not only that the Norkin had killed Fido in order to
take the throne, but that they also murdered his brother on,
even as they poured into the square in front of the palace,
they demanded the heads of the Norkin and Matt a,
they were met with an UN expected site when Sarina Natalia emerged with Peter
and prince Ivan alive and well,
AUM on Mattia then showed himself and seemingly managed to talk down the angry
mob, which was now full of doubts regarding their true purpose. For a while,
it seems like the uprising might end peacefully.
The rage of the crowd had been subdued and the TKI were ready to head home.
However,
a commander into Michael do Giov thought that this would be the perfect time to
enact some strong military discipline and to began berating the man for their
actions to William Marley. They did not respond well to this. In fact,
their anger came back in full force.
A group of STR Ky picked up the commander and threw him onto the Pikes of their
comrades, who then proceeded to cut him into pieces.
They then did at the same thing to Mattia who was also taken and executed right
in front of 10 year old, Peter,
the enraged soldiers rushed through the palace and went from room to room,
looking for more boy and kins to execute. They killed one of Natalia's brothers,
as well as several other statesmen. When they got tired,
they sealed the escapes, put guards on the Kremlin and went home. The next day,
the Austral returns to continu ferocious hunt.
The main target they wanted was Ivan. Norkin another one of Natalia's brothers,
who they believed to be the masterminds behind the alleged conspiracy.
On the third day,
they gave an ultimatum that if the Royal family did not give up Ivan,
they will kill everyone inside the palace faced with little choice.
They surrendered Ivan to the BEO where he also suffered and agonizing and
gruesome death. Finally, after their thirst for blood was satiated.
The stge reached a settlement with the remaining by which unsurprisingly was
greatly in the soldier's favor.
Since the nobleman were in no position to negotiate the ske received bag,
pay complete amnesty for their murders and even a Tramal column,
which celebrated their D against the traders.
Moreover Peter's half brother Ivan was installed as joint SAR with his sister,
Sophia ruling as Regent for both of them,
the two young rulers even had a special double throne made for them,
which included a hole in the back where Sophia would sit and listen to
dignitaries and other visitors. And they would tell the SARS how to respond.
Now, just before we get into the rest of today's video,
I do wanna take quick moment to tell you about today's sponsor monday.com.
monday.com is a team management tool, which is perfect for teams of any size.
Maybe it's just you and another freelancer,
or maybe you working with thousands of people,
or maybe like me you're somewhere in between.
Definitely closer to the smaller site though.
If you're not a fan of meetings who is or get lost in Excel sheets and board
presentations, then monday.com is perfect for you.
Monday has replaced all of these with an intuitive and empowering platform.
That's very popular among non-tech teams. I'm not particularly a techy person.
And I like that.
It's easy for me and everyone else on the team to use monday.com currently works
with tens of thousands of teams and distrusted by giant companies like
discovery, channel, WeWork, Uber, and many, many more. So empower your team,
make them feel like they're part of something bigger with monday.com.
You can get started with a free trial through the link in the description below,
uh, let's get back to today's video.
Sophia was now the defacto ruler of Russia,
but her authority was contested almost immediately by one of her co-conspirators
in the stri Atki uprising,
a boy named Andrea Avi Kansky Kansky will did a lot of power because he had the
loyalty of the STRs ski.
As the boy kept pushing the boundaries of his influence.
Sophia believed it would only be a matter of time before Kansky ambitions and
arrogance drove him to attempt to seize complete power.
Indeed it wasn't long before rumors of a planned co started swirling.
So Sophia took the two SARS and fled Moscow to the roll summer residence.
Fortunately for the SARS Kansky also managed to anger. A lot of the boars,
he was easily found guilty of plotting to assassinate the raw family on
September the 17th, 1682,
Sophia even succeeded in Luing Kansky to our residents outside Moscow and
outside the protection of STRs,
where he was condemned death and beheaded on the spot alongside his son,
whether the boy actually planned to kill the rolls or whether he was
outmaneuvered by Sophia. We can't say with certainty, but one thing was clear.
A Serena who was back in power, as far as Peter was concerned,
he cared very little for his position. As saw while he was young,
due to the events he witnessed during the uprising,
he developed an extreme aversion to Moscow and its palace,
and he preferred to spend his time in the countryside.
He took an interest in sailing ship,
building the military for passions with will influence not only as re as saw,
but the development of the whole Russian embar during this time.
Peter also married yo dox Lapino at the insistence of his mother.
This was not a happy marriage though.
Once Peter later forced his wife to enter a convent,
his relationship with his son, Alex was even worse.
And it's believed that at one point that the air plotted against his father
looking to restore or the old ways this was something Peter could not abide.
And he had Alexy and all of his acquaintances tortured banished.
And in some cases executed Alexy himself died in 17,
18 due to wounds from being whipped.
We're getting ahead of ourselves though, at this time,
Peter was still a boy and Sophia was still in power.
Eventually she lost the support of many by after two failed military campaigns
against the Crimean carnet influenced by her partner in crime and lover VLY
Galyon, who was also an ARD fan of the west.
Sophia did something a SAR never did before she joined a coalition of European
powers in a war against autumn EMBA. And in exchange,
she received Kiev from the kingdom of Poland.
Sophia's main target was the crem tars VAs of the autumn EMBA who conducted
frequent raids into Russian Lance. However,
her forces in experience in large scale combat became evidence and Galzin
especially proved INEP commanding an army.
They launched a failed campaign in 16, 16, 87, where they not only lost battles,
but were forced to retreat and give up settlements to the advancing tars.
A second campaign in 1689 was also unsuccessful in the summer of
16 89, 17 year old.
Peter had the support of the boy and over through his half sister, Sophia,
who was forced to enter convents and become a nun.
Peter had no ill will towards his stepbrother, Ivan,
who was allowed to stay yaws co ruler.
Although this was purely in name only as Peter was still not of age.
His mother attempted to serve as Regents, which she did until she died in 1694,
Ivan died two year, years later,
and the 24 year old Peter finally became the sole ruler of Russia.
It took a long time to get here,
but now Peter ruled unopposed and was free to enact his vision for a modern
Russia. Based on the models of the Western European powers. He took on foreign,
such as France, foreign Patrick Gordon serve his close advisors.
He enacted sweeping reforms to reorganize the Russian military.
He adopted Western dress as did his courtiers and officials.
He instituted the Julian calendar moving the celebration of new year to January.
The first, he also began marrying off his relatives to other European royalty,
a practice which had been shunned by his assesses.
And he also made a habit of sending young nobleman to study abroad,
to receive a more worldly education in one of his more,
let's say unconventional moments,
Peter even enacted a beard tax to encourage Russians to cut their beards because
the clean shaven look was in Vogue. In Western Europe.
The SAR introduced this new decree in quite dramatic fashion in six Dean 98
during a reception in his honor,
Peter stunned his guests by coming down to greet them clean shaven,
sporting just mustache.
He then took out a razor and proceeded to go around from one male guest to
another cutting off their beards with his own hands. At first,
nobody was safe from the razor except for priests and peasants.
Everybody else would've been shaved on the spot by police officials.
If they were caught harboring illegal facial hat.
Evidently though Peter relaxed on this stance,
some wart introduced the beer tax, which was not only more practical,
but also beneficial to his Coffs in 1697,
Peter organized a year long diplomatic mission known as the grand embassy.
He visited multiple countries in Western Europe looking to secure various deals
and serve Evers. He managed to obtain foreign specialists,
new technology and weapons,
but failed in his ultimate goal of finding allies for his ongoing conflict.
With the Ottoman empire.
It was bad timing as the west had its own problem to deal with Charles II.
The inbred sickly king of Spain was in poor health and had no as,
and Europe was preparing for the war of succession that his death trigger.
Peter spent most of his time in the Netherlands and Englands which at the time
were both ruled by William II, AKA William of orange.
He usually went incognito one, the pseudonym Peter Meha of,
but the fact that he was six foot,
eight inches tall meant that he seldom managed to remain anonymous.
He also enjoyed quite a few notorious drinking sessions and after leaving
London,
the law to provided him with accommodations complains that Peter and his revenue
completely trashed the house where they were staying thus setting the bar pretty
high for the rock stars that would follow in his footsteps.
Some 200 years later also found a drinking buddy in Perrin Osborne.
The marque of Carma, a Marine architect,
Osborne earns the SARS friendship when he designed a yacht for him as a gift
from king William,
the two reportedly drank so frequently at one pub in London that the landlord
renamed it, the SAR of musky, the pub is gone today,
but nearby musky street still exists as reminder of Peter's party days in
London,
this all had to end the grand embassy early because back home he faced another
Trotsky uprising in July of 1698. This one, however,
went decidedly in his favor.
The rebellion was crushed even before Peter return to Russia,
although dozens were executed and many more sent into Axel,
this was not good enough for this saw when he returned to Moscow,
he demanded a major investigation to discover all the accomplices after a lot of
torture and confessions.
Most of them probably false well over 1000 Strake were executed and
hundreds more send in to AAL regimens that had nothing to do with the rebellion
were disbanded while all the Strout ski and their family were banished from
Moscow.
Many believed that this new uprising simply gave Peter a pretext to enact his
long awaited revenge on the S STRs ski for their previous RT that terrorized him
as a child and led to the death of his family.
In case it wasn't clear yet.
Peter was a big fan of ships and his Raiders ambition was to turn Russia into
one of Europe's maritime powers.
He learned a lot about ship building during his grand embassy and obtains.
The knowledge manpower and resources needed to construct watercrafts as good as
those in Western Europe. But in order to fulfill his goal,
there was one thing he needed access to water after all,
you can't really have a Navy on lands. And, and at that time,
Russia only had access to the north sea via the port at Aang gels.
And that was simply not good enough.
This necessity would more or less shape Peter's foreign policies during his
entire reign.
Russia was still at war with the Ottoman empire from the time Sophia launched
her ill fated campaigns in crimee without, in mind,
in 1695 and 1696,
Peter renewed against the Turks with two new military campaigns focused
on capturing the fortres of Azo.
Ultimately the Russians were successful scoring not only an important victory
against their enemy,
but also gaining access to the sea of Azo and the black sea.
The war ended in 1699 with the signing of the treaty of Carli.
Peter's next target was the BTIC sea,
which back then was almost entirely under the control of the Swedish. Em,
empire led by 18 year old king, Charles the 12th,
therefore in 1700 Russia went to war in a conflict that would rage on for over
21 years,
but would ultimately lead to the birth of the Russian empire and secure its
position as a new global power.
This conflict became known as the great Northern war going into the fight.
Peter formed an Alliance with Frederick,
the fourth king of Denmark and Norway and Augustus II,
the strong who ruled of the Commonwealth of Poland,
Lithuania as well as the electorate of Sony over the years,
many other nations would come in and out of the fight as the war engulfed,
most of Northern central and Eastern Europe,
it might be fair to say that Peter and his comrades in arms were hoping for a
quick victory by overwhelming Sweden with a three pronged attack that did not
happen as the first battle were all in Sweden's favor just a few months after it
declared war Denmark,
Norway had to call peace with the Swedish empire after being defeated,
trave due to a previous treaty.
Sweden had the maritime support of the United Kingdom and the Netherlands,
as we mentioned, though, they were busy with the war of Spanish succession.
So although they helped fight off the attackers,
they would not assist Sweden in conquering Denmark.
A similar situation occurred in Polands,
although it took a bit longer king Charles,
the 12th mounted a successful counter offensive and conquered Warsaw and crack
out. The two sides signed. The treaty of Rin starts in 1706,
where Augustus thei had to abdicate the throne recognized Stan SLAs.
The first as the new Polish king and renounces Alliance with Russia,
speaking of Russia,
their first attempt gaining a foothold in the BTIC ended in disaster.
The battle of Nava on November,
the 30th 1700 concluded with a decisive Swedish victory,
as they caused up to 8,000 Russian casualties while losing less than a 10th of
that number. And they captured almost 200 artillery pieces because king Charles,
the 12th elected to concentrate as their efforts on Poland.
Peter had years to build up a new, modern,
better trained and better equipped army in 1703. He founded St. Petersburg,
which would serve as the new capital for his ZAPA in 1708 with Poland taking
care of Charles redirected his attention to Russia.
Although initially successful, he soon learned a very harsh lesson.
One that other future founders would learn at their own cost.
And that's the year don't invade Russia in winter. It didn't help that,
that season later dubbed the great frost happened to be the coldest European
winter of the past 500 years after suffering heavy losses to the colds,
as well as starvation Charles routed his forces to Russian owned Ukraine
coal in the battle of Poltava on July the eighth, 1709.
This was a huge victory for Peter. Consequently,
Charles had to retreat into the Ottoman empire,
which was his ally and Poland and Denmark canceled their peace treaties and
joined the war. Again. The tide turns in Peter's favor,
but he got a bit to cocky.
He demanded the Ottoman Salton surrender Charles to when the latter refused
Peter invaded and was soundly defeated during the PR river campaign between 17,
10, and 1711. He had to make multiple concessions including giving back as of,
but fortunately for him,
the Salton wasn't interested in a protracted war and he eventually kicked
Charles out of his empire in 1714, the conflict lasted for another seven years.
Sweden still had occasional military victories,
but it never regained the dominant position it had had at the outset of the war.
Other nations like PR and Hanover smelled the blood in the water and also
declared war on the Swedish empire. On November the 30th 17,
18 Charles wealth was killed by a bullet to the side of the head during the
siege of Fredrickton. The great Northern war ended on September the 10th,
1721 with the treaty of NESAD Russia,
Estonia Levonia part of Finlands and now it had its much covered
entry into the Baltic.
This represented an important shift in the power balance of Europe.
The Swedish and bar was gone and the Russian empire had risen
Peter's later years were mostly marked by continued reform inside his new em
empire. However, when the S Saed dynasty began crumbling in modern day, Iran,
Peter couldn't resist gaining entry to the CASP EMC.
He launched the Russia Persian war in 1722,
which ended a year later with a victory for Russia shortly after the war,
Peter fell with bladder problems. He died on February the eighth,
1725 and was buried at some Peter and Paul's cathedral in St. Petersburg.
He was succeeded by his second wife, Catherine,
the first who became the first woman to rule Imperial Russia,
setting age for future rulers, such as Katherine, the great who by the way,
we already covered on this channel.
So definitely check out that video as always.
I really hope you enjoyed that video. Please do hit that like button,
if you did. Don't forget to subscribe also, please do check it off.
Fantastic sponsor monday.com. They are linked to below this video and as always,
thank you for one sh.